Using Metamod
=-=-=-=-=-=-=

Client Commands
===============

Similar to the server console interface, clients can also issue commands
to Metamod, of the following form:

  - meta version - displays version information about the Metamod instance
    currently running on the server, ie:
   
    Metamod v1.21p38  2018/02/11 (5:13)
    by Will Day
       http://www.metamod.org/
     Patch: Metamod-P (mm-p) v38
     by Jussi Kivilinna
        http://koti.mbnet.fi/axh/
    compiled: Feb 11 2017, xx:xx:xx EET (optimized)
    
  - meta list - displays information about the list of currently running
    plugins, ie:
   
    Currently running plugins:
    [ 1] Trace HLSDK API, v1.XX.93, 2003/02/17, by Will Day
    <willday@metamod.org>, see http://www.metamod.org/
    [ 2] Adminmod, v2.50.56 (MM), Jul 13 2003, by Alfred Reynolds
    <alfred@valvesoftware.com>, see http://www.adminmod.org/
    2 plugins

Client Cvars
============

Also available to client browser applications is a cvar metamod_version
that should report the version of Metamod running on the server, ie:

"metamod_version" is "1.21p38"

Installation
============

If you want to install Metamod by hand, here's what you have to do:

   
  - Install the Metamod library (.dll for win32, or .so for linux) to a
    directory under your game directory. For instance, if you were running
    Counter-Strike, under win32 you might want have:
   
        half-life/cstrike/addons/metamod/dlls/metamod.dll
   
    If a directory you want doesn't exist, create it.
   
  - Edit the "liblist.gam" file in your game directory, replacing the game
    dll filename with the Metamod dll filename. For instance with
    Counter-Strike, you would change:
   
        gamedll "dlls/mp.dll"
        gamedll_linux "dlls/cs.so"
   
    to:
   
        gamedll "addons/metamod/dlls/metamod.dll"
        gamedll_linux "addons/metamod/dlls/metamod.so"
   
    Note that it's only really necessary to change the line corresponding
    to your OS (win32 or linux); you can leave the other line unchanged,
    or you can change it - it doesn't matter.
   
  - To load plugins at game startup, you'll need to create a "plugins.ini"
    file containing a list of the plugins you want to load.


Configuration
=============

Metamod has several ways to provide config options, partially because it
started with one method and then added other methods, but also because one
method can be more convenient than the other, varying with the situation.

Generally speaking, the two methods of providing configuration information
to Metamod are:

  - on the command line, via +localinfo arguments to hlds.
  - as the contents of some file that Metamod reads and parses.

The confusing part can come when the pathnames to some of the config files
can be specified via command line options - or indeed, when the pathnames
to some config files can be specified in other config files.

In any case, here are the various config options and config files Metamod
uses, (listed in order of priority), where "$gamedir" indicates the game
directory, ie "cstrike":

  - +localinfo mm_configfile <file>
   
  - +localinfo mm_pluginsfile <file>
  - config.ini option: plugins_file <file>
  - $gamedir/addons/metamod/plugins.ini
  - $gamedir/metamod.ini
   
  - $localinfo mm_execcfg <file>
  - config.ini option: exec_cfg <file>
  - $gamedir/addons/metamod/exec.cfg
  - $gamedir/metaexec.cfg
   
  - $localinfo mm_gamedll <file>
  - config.ini option: gamedll <file>
  - [DEL]$gamedir/metagame.ini[DEL] -- NO LONGER SUPPORTED.


File: plugins.ini
=====

Default location: _$gamedir/addons/metamod/plugins.ini, ie "cstrike/addons
/metamod/plugins.ini".

Plugins are described in a file "plugins.ini" and each line describes a
plugin to load:

    <platform> <filepath> [<description>]

Fields are whitespace delimited (tabs/spaces).

  - Platform is a keyword, either "linux" or "win32".
   
  - Filepath is a path to the DLL/so file. Relative paths are from the
    game dir; absolute paths are also valid. Paths should use unix-style 
    forward slashes (/) and not backward slashes (\), even on windows
    platforms.
   
    Also, the filepath (once expanded to full path name) is expected to be
    unique within the list of plugins. Thus, a plugin with a fullpathname
    matching that of a previous plugin is considered a duplicate, and is
    not loaded.
   
  - Description is an optional description of the plugin, used in place of
    the plugin's internal name in log messages and console output.
    Whitespace in the description _is_ allowed; quoting is unnecessary.

Comments are recognized at _only_ the beginning of a line, and can be in
either shell style ("#") or c++ style ("//").

For instance, in "cstrike/addons/metamod/plugins.ini" these are all valid
lines:

    // linux    dlls/mybot.so
    # win32     dlls/mybot-old.dll         Mybot old
    win32       dlls/mybot.dll             Mybot current
    linux       /tmp/stub_mm_i386.so
    win32       /tmp/stub_mm_i386.dll
    linux       ../dlls/trace_mm_i386.so
    win32       ../dlls/trace_mm_i386.dll
    linux       dlls/admin_MM_i386.so
    win32       dlls/admin_MM_i386.dll

Note that order in the plugins.ini file _is_ significant. Plugins are
loaded and accessed in the order specified, so ordering can be important,
depending on the plugin(s).

The file is re-read at changelevel, as well as on demand (via "meta
refresh" console command; see below). When the file is re-read, it will:

  - load any new plugins added to the file
  - unload any plugins that have been deleted from the file. This is only
    applicable to plugins loaded _from the inifile_. If the plugin was
    loaded from the console, it will not be unloaded during a refresh,
    whether it's in the inifile or not.
  - reload any plugin whose file on disk has been updated since it was
    loaded. Note this appears to be only useful under linux, as under
    Windows you cannot rename or overwrite an open DLL, so it doesn't look
    a loaded plugin could ever have a newer file on disk. Oh well.

The game dll is auto-detected, along the same lines AdminMod operated
(looking at the "gamedir"); see "mm_gamedll" below if you want to use a
"bot" DLL.

You can override the name of this file by specifying it via the +localinfo
field "mm_pluginsfile".

For compatibility with previous versions, Metamod will also look for a
file "metamod.ini" under the gamedir, ie "cstrike/metamod.ini".


File: config.ini
=====

Default location: _$gamedir/addons/metamod/config.ini, ie "cstrike/addons/
metamod/config.ini".

This contains basic config information, at the moment duplicating most of
the +localinfo variables, but allowing for more flexible expansion of
config options in the future. Also, it provides somewhat more reliable
options setting, since +localinfo munges some argument values (in
particular, pathnames with leading dots, ie "../dlls/blah.dll").

Basic format is:

    <option> <value>

Fields are whitespace delimited (tabs/spaces). Comments are recognized at 
_only_ the beginning of a line, and can be in either shell style ("#") or
c++ style ("//"). The following is a list of currently recognized options,
their defaults, and examples of usage:

   
  - debuglevel <number>
   
    where <number> is an integer, 0 and up.
    Sets the initial debugging level for metamod (same as cvar
    "meta_debug").
    Default is normally 0. If hlds is run with "-dev", default is 3.
    Overridden by: +localinfo mm_debug <number>
    Examples:
    debuglevel 0
    debuglevel 42
   
  - gamedll <path>
   
    where <path> is an absolute path, or a path relative to the gamedir.
    Overrides the auto-detected gamedll, in particular for bots.
    Default is empty, with gamedll being auto-recognized based on the
    gamedir.
    Overridden by: +localinfo mm_gamedll <number>
    Examples:
    gamedll dlls/hl.dll
    gamedll ../podbot/podbot.dll
    gamedll /home/bots/dlls/mybot.dll
   
  - plugins_file <path>
   
    where <path> is an absolute path, or a path relative to the gamedir.
    Overrides the default filename containing the MM plugins to load.
    Default is "addons/metamod/plugins.ini".
    Overridden by: +localinfo mm_pluginsfile <number>
    Examples:
    plugins_file cfg/clanmode.ini
    plugins_file ../private.ini
    plugins_file /home/half-life/testing.ini
   
  - exec_cfg <path>
   
    where <path> is a path relative to the gamedir. NOTE! This cannot be
    an absolute path, as hlds will not "exec" absolute pathnames.
    Overrides the default filename containing hlds commands to run just
    after loading Metamod.
    Default is "addons/metamod/exec.cfg".
    Overridden by: +localinfo mm_execcfg <number>
    Examples:
    exec_cfg configs/debugging.cfg
    exec_cfg ../clan/match.cfg
  
  - autodetect <yes/no>
  
    Setting to disable or enable autodetection of gamedll.
    Extra feature for Metamod+All-Mod-Support Patch.
    Default is "yes".
    Overridden by: +localinfo mm_autodetect <yes/no>

  - clientmeta <yes/no>
  
    Setting to disable or enable Metamod's client commands, 'meta list' and
    'meta version'.
    Extra setting for Metamod+All-Mod-Support Patch.
    Default is "yes".
    Overridden by: +localinfo mm_clientmeta <yes/no>

You can override the name of this file by specifying it via the +localinfo
field "mm_configfile".


File: exec.cfg
=====

Default location: _$gamedir/addons/metamod/exec.cfg, ie "cstrike/addons/
metamod/exec.cfg". This is necessary for plugins that need to have
settings specified prior to early API routines like ServerActivate, since
autoexec.cfg is read too early and server.cfg is read to late. In
particular, I found this necessary for the Trace plugin, in order to trace
routines like RegUserMsg which are called during ServerActivate.

You can override the name of this file by specifying it via the +localinfo
field "mm_execcfg".

For compatibility with previous versions, Metamod will also look for a
file "metaexec.cfg" under the gamedir, ie "cstrike/metaexec.cfg".


[DEL]file: metagame.ini[DEL]
=========

NOTE! This file is no longer supported! -- use instead the +localinfo
field "mm_gamedll" or the config.ini option gamedll.


Commandline option: +localinfo
===================

Several of Metamod's configuration options can be specified by the
"+localinfo" facility on the hlds command line. This is similar to the
"setinfo" console command, where the syntax is:

    +localinfo <field> <value>

Current localinfo fields recognized by Metamod:

   
  - mm_configfile Specifies the file that lists config options, instead of
    using the file config.ini. The <value> should be the pathname of the
    config file, either absolute path or path relative to the gamedir.
   
  - mm_pluginsfile Specifies a file that lists the Metamod plugins to
    load, instead of using the file plugins.ini. The <value> should be the
    pathname of the plugins file, either absolute path or path relative to
    the gamedir.
   
  - mm_execcfg Specifies a file that contains cvar or other configs to be
    exec'd after loading the plugins, instead of using the file exec.cfg.
    The <value> should be the pathname of the exec file, either absolute
    path or path relative to the gamedir.
   
  - mm_autodetect Specifies if 'autodetect of gamedll' should be enabled
    or disabled. It's enabled by default. This is extra feature of 
    Metamod+All-Mod-Support Patch.
   
  - mm_clientmeta Specifies if Metamod's client commands should be enabled
    or disabled. It's enabled by default. This is extra setting of 
    Metamod+All-Mod-Support Patch.
   
  - mm_gamedll Specifies a game or Bot DLL to be used instead of the
    normal gameDLL. The <value> should be the pathname of the DLL, either
    absolute path or path relative to the gamedir.
   
    This replaces using the metagame.ini file. With previous versions of
    AdminMod (2.10 and earlier), this same functionality was provided by
    the file "admin.ini".
   
  - mm_debug Specifies an initial meta_debug value.

Note that each localinfo field can have only one value. If specified more
than once on the command line, only the last one will be recognized. (In
particular, trying to use mm_gamedll to load multiple dll-style bots will 
not work. In a case like that, the multiple dll's must be chained
together).

Some examples are:

        ./hlds_run -game cstrike +localinfo mm_pluginsfile mylist.ini
        ./hlds_run -game cstrike +localinfo mm_execcfg mysettings.cfg
        ./hlds_run -game cstrike +localinfo mm_gamedll dlls/pod_bot.so
        ./hlds_run -game cstrike +localinfo mm_debug 7

Note, paths should use unix-style forward slashes (/) and not backward
slashes (\), even on windows platforms.


Commands
========

All console command functionality is provide by a single command "meta",
with multiple sub-commands:

   usage: meta <command> [<arguments>]
   valid commands are:
      version                - display Metamod version info
      list                   - list plugins currently loaded
      cmds                   - list console cmds registered by plugins
      cvars                  - list cvars registered by plugins
      refresh                - load/unload any new/deleted/updated plugins
      config                 - show config info loaded from config.ini
      load <name>            - find and load a plugin with the given name
      unload <plugin>        - unload a loaded plugin
      reload <plugin>        - unload a plugin and load it again
      info <plugin>          - show all information about a plugin
      pause <plugin>         - pause a loaded, running plugin
      unpause <plugin>       - unpause a previously paused plugin
      retry <plugin>         - retry a plugin that previously failed its action
      clear <plugin>         - clear a failed plugin from the list
      force_unload <plugin>  - forcibly unload a loaded plugin
      require <plugin>       - exit server if plugin not loaded/running

where <plugin> can be either the plugin index number, or a non-ambiguous
prefix string matching description or file.

Also, a single cvar is available:
   meta_debug       - set debugging level

For instance with:

  Currently loaded plugins:
        description       stat pend  file               vers    src  load  unlod
   [ 1] Trace HLSDK API   RUN   -    mm_trace_i386.so   v0.90   ini  ANY   Pause
   [ 2] adminmod          RUN   -    admin_MM.so        v2.11   ini  Start Start
   [ 3] stub              RUN   -    mm_stub_i386.so    v0.90   ini  ANY   Pause
  2 plugins, 2 running

You could then do any of the following to unload the API Trace plugin:
   meta unload 1
   meta unload trace
   meta unload mm_trace


Plugin Loading/Unloading Process
================================

Through the process of loading and unloading, a plugin can be in one of
several different states ('stat' column in the 'meta list' output):

  - BADFILE - The plugin file couldn't be found, or it doesn't appear to
    be a valid Metamod plugin.
  - OPENED - The plugin file was found, and is a valid Metamod plugin, and
    is ready to be loaded.
  - FAILED - The plugin file attempted to load or unload, but couldn't
    complete for some reason.
  - RUNNING - The plugin file was loaded and is active and running.
  - PAUSED - The plugin file was loaded, but has been temporarily
    disabled.

Also through the operation process, a plugin can have a pending "action"
to next take (indicated by the 'pend' column in the 'meta list' output),
and can be one of:

  - LOAD - Open and look at the plugin file.
  - ATTACH - Attach the plugin to the running game; ie activate it
  - UNLOAD - Remove the plugin from the running game and close the file
  - RELOAD - Unload/close and re-open/load the plugin, for instance when
    the plugin file has changed.


Example Output
==============

Here's some other example output:

   meta info admin
            name: adminmod
            desc: Adminmod
          status: running
          action: none
        filename: dlls/admin_MM.so
            file: admin_MM.so
        pathname: /home/willday/test/cstrike/dlls/admin_MM.so
           index: 3
          source: ini file
        loadable: at server startup
      unloadable: at server startup
         version: 2.11
            date: 2001/02/04
          author: Alfred Reynolds <alfred@mazuma.net.au>
             url: http://www.adminmod.org/
          logtag: ADMIN
     last loaded: Mon Feb  5 02:06:34 2001
   DLLAPI functions:
      GameDLLInit
      DispatchThink
      ClientConnect
      ClientCommand
      ClientUserInfoChanged
      ServerActivate
   6 functions (dllapi)
   No DLLAPI-Post functions.
   No NEWAPI functions.
   No NEWAPI-Post functions.
   No Engine functions.
   No Engine-Post functions.
   Registered commands:
      admin_command
   1 commands
   Registered cvars:                      float value  string value
      users_file                             0.000000  users.ini
      maps_file                              0.000000  mapvote.txt
      default_access                         1.000000  1
      ips_file                               0.000000  0
      reserve_slots                          1.000000  1
      reserve_slots_msg                      0.000000  0
      admin_debug                            1.000000  1
      password_field                         0.000000  admin_password
      alarm_message                          0.000000  0
      alarm_time                             0.000000  0
      use_regex                              1.000000  1
      models_password_field                  0.000000  0
      models_file                            0.000000  models.ini
      models_kick_msg                        0.000000  Invalid model
      script_file                            0.000000  cstrike/dlls/admin.amx
      help_file                              0.000000  admin_help.txt
      vote_freq                            360.000000  360
      encrypt_password                       1.000000  1
      pretty_say                             1.000000  1
      admin_mod_version                      2.110000  2.11
      reserve_type                           1.000000  1
      map_ratio                             60.000000  60
      kick_ratio                            75.000000  75
      words_file                             0.000000  0
      password_timeout                    1800.000000  1800
      file_access_read                       0.000000  0
      file_access_write                      0.000000  0
      public_slots_free                     20.000000  20.000000
      allow_client_exec                      0.000000  0
      admin_balance_teams                    0.000000  0
   30 cvars
   No child plugins.
   
   meta cmds
   Registered plugin commands:
          plugin              command
    [  1] API trace           trace_version
    [  2] API trace           trace
    [  3] API trace           untrace
    [  4] API trace           showtrace
    [  5] Adminmod            admin_command
   5 commands, 5 available

   meta cvars
   Registered plugin cvars:
          plugin      cvar                   float value  string value
    [  1] API trace   trace_debug               3.000000  3.000000
    [  2] API trace   trace_dllapi              8.000000  8
    [  3] API trace   trace_newapi              0.000000  0
    [  4] API trace   trace_engine              8.000000  8
    [  5] Adminmod    users_file                0.000000  users.ini
    [  6] Adminmod    maps_file                 0.000000  mapvote.txt
    [  7] Adminmod    default_access            1.000000  1
    [  8] Adminmod    ips_file                  0.000000  0
    [  9] Adminmod    reserve_slots             1.000000  1
    [ 10] Adminmod    reserve_slots_msg         0.000000  0
    [ 11] Adminmod    admin_debug               1.000000  1
    [ 12] Adminmod    password_field            0.000000  admin_password
    [ 13] Adminmod    alarm_message             0.000000  0
    [ 14] Adminmod    alarm_time                0.000000  0
    [ 15] Adminmod    use_regex                 1.000000  1
    [ 16] Adminmod    models_password_fiel      0.000000  0
    [ 17] Adminmod    models_file               0.000000  models.ini
    [ 18] Adminmod    models_kick_msg           0.000000  Invalid model
    [ 19] Adminmod    script_file               0.000000  cstrike/dlls/admin.amx
    [ 20] Adminmod    help_file                 0.000000  admin_help.txt
    [ 21] Adminmod    vote_freq               360.000000  360
    [ 22] Adminmod    encrypt_password          1.000000  1
    [ 23] Adminmod    pretty_say                1.000000  1
    [ 24] Adminmod    admin_mod_version         2.110000  2.11
    [ 25] Adminmod    reserve_type              1.000000  1
    [ 26] Adminmod    map_ratio                60.000000  60
    [ 27] Adminmod    kick_ratio               75.000000  75
    [ 28] Adminmod    words_file                0.000000  0
    [ 29] Adminmod    password_timeout       1800.000000  1800
    [ 30] Adminmod    file_access_read          0.000000  0
    [ 31] Adminmod    file_access_write         0.000000  0
    [ 32] Adminmod    public_slots_free        20.000000  20.000000
    [ 33] Adminmod    allow_client_exec         0.000000  0
    [ 34] Adminmod    admin_balance_teams       0.000000  0
   34 cvars, 34 available

   meta unload stub
   Unloaded plugin 'Stub plugin'
   Currently loaded plugins:
         description       stat pend  file               vers   src  load  unlod
    [ 1] Trace HLSDK API   RUN   -    mm_trace_i386.so   v0.90  ini  ANY   Pause
    [ 2] adminmod          RUN   -    admin_MM.so        v2.11  ini  Start Start
   2 plugins, 2 running

   meta load stub
   Loaded plugin 'stub' successfully
   Currently loaded plugins:
         description       stat pend  file               vers   src  load  unlod
    [ 1] Trace HLSDK API   RUN   -    mm_trace_i386.so   v0.90  ini  ANY   Pause
    [ 2] adminmod          RUN   -    admin_MM.so        v2.11  ini  Start Start
    [ 3] stub              RUN   -    mm_stub_i386.so    v0.90  cmd  ANY   Pause
   3 plugins, 3 running

--------------------------------------------------------------------------
